It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done, You must certainly send it next year to the Grosvenor. The Academy is too large and too vulgar. Whenever I have gone there, there have been either so many people that I have not been able to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so many pictures that I have not been able to see the people, which was worse. The Grosvenor is really the only place.
I don t think I shall send it anywhere, No, I won t send it anywhere.
Not send it anywhere? My dear fellow, why? Have you any reason? What odd chaps you painters are! You do anything in the world to gain a reputation. As soon as you have one, you seem to want to throw it away. It is silly of you, for there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and that is not being talked about. A portrait like this would set you far above all the young men in England, and make the old men quite jealous, if old men are ever capable of any emotion.
I know you will laugh at me, but I really can t exhibit it. I have put too much of myself into it.
Yes, I knew you would; but it is quite true, all the same.
Too much of yourself in it! Upon my word, Basil, I didn t know you were so vain; and I really can t see any resemblance between you, with your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this young Adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves. Why, my dear Basil, he is a Narcissus, and you well, of course you have an intellectual expression and all that. But beauty, real beauty, ends where an intellectual expression begins. Intellect is in itself a mode of exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face. The moment one sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something horrid. Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions. How perfectly hideous they are! Except, of course, in the Church. But then in the Church they don t think. A bishop keeps on saying at the age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen, and as a natural consequence he always looks absolutely delightful. Your mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, but whose picture really fascinates me, never thinks. I feel quite sure of that. He is some brainless beautiful creature who should be always here in winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in summer when we want something to chill our intelligence. Don t flatter yourself, Basil: you are not in the least like him.
You don t understand me, Harry, Of course I am not like him. I know that perfectly well. Indeed, I should be sorry to look like him. You shrug your shoulders? I am telling you the truth. There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual distinction, the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the faltering steps of kings. It is better not to be different from one s fellows. The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world. They can sit at their ease and gape at the play. If they know nothing of victory, they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat. They live as we all should live undisturbed, indifferent, and without disquiet. They neither bring ruin upon others, nor ever receive it from alien hands. Your rank and wealth, Harry; my brains, such as they are my art, whatever it may be worth; Dorian Gray s good looks we shall all suffer for what the gods have given us, suffer terribly.
Dorian Gray? Is that his name?
Yes, that is his name. I didn t intend to tell it to you.
But why not?
Oh, I can t explain. When I like people immensely, I never tell their names to any one. It is like surrendering a part of them. I have grown to love secrecy. It seems to be the one thing that can make modern life mysterious or marvellous to us. The commonest thing is delightful if one only hides it. When I leave town now I never tell my people where I am going. If I did, I would lose all my pleasure. It is a silly habit, I dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great deal of romance into one s life. I suppose you think me awfully foolish about it?
Not at all, not at all, my dear Basil. You seem to forget that I am married, and the one charm of marriage is that it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties. I never know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what I am doing. When we meet we do meet occasionally, when we dine out together, or go down to the Duke s we tell each other the most absurd stories with the most serious faces. My wife is very good at it much better, in fact, than I am. She never gets confused over her dates, and I always do. But when she does find me out, she makes no row at all. I sometimes wish she would; but she merely laughs at me.
I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry, I believe that you are really a very good husband, but that you are thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues. You are an extraordinary fellow. You never say a moral thing, and you never do a wrong thing. Your cynicism is simply a pose.
Being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose I know,
I am afraid I must be going, Basil, and before I go, I insist on your answering a question I put to you some time ago.
What is that?
You know quite well.
I do not, Harry.
Well, I will tell you what it is. I want you to explain to me why you won t exhibit Dorian Gray s picture. I want the real reason.
I told you the real reason.
No, you did not. You said it was because there was too much of yourself in it. Now, that is childish.
Harry, every portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not of the sitter. The sitter is merely the accident, the occasion. It is not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on the coloured canvas, reveals himself. The reason I will not exhibit this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown in it the secret of my own soul.
And what is that?
I will tell you,
I am all expectation, Basil,
Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry, and I am afraid you will hardly understand it. Perhaps you will hardly believe it.
I am quite sure I shall understand it, and as for believing things, I can believe anything, provided that it is quite incredible.
The story is simply this, Two months ago I went to a crush at Lady Brandon s. You know we poor artists have to show ourselves in society from time to time, just to remind the public that we are not savages. With an evening coat and a white tie, as you told me once, anybody, even a stock-broker, can gain a reputation for being civilized. Well, after I had been in the room about ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers and tedious academicians, I suddenly became conscious that some one was looking at me. I turned half-way round and saw Dorian Gray for the first time. When our eyes met, I felt that I was growing pale. A curious sensation of terror came over me. I knew that I had come face to face with some one whose mere personality was so fascinating that, if I allowed it to do so, it would absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art itself. I did not want any external influence in my life. You know yourself, Harry, how independent I am by nature. I have always been my own master; had at least always been so, till I met Dorian Gray. Then but I don t know how to explain it to you. Something seemed to tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life. I had a strange feeling that fate had in store for me exquisite joys and exquisite sorrows. I grew afraid and turned to quit the room. It was not conscience that made me do so: it was a sort of cowardice. I take no credit to myself for trying to escape.
Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil. Conscience is the trade-name of the firm. That is all.
I don t believe that, Harry, and I don t believe you do either. However, whatever was my motive and it may have been pride, for I used to be very proud I certainly struggled to the door. There, of course, I stumbled against Lady Brandon.
she screamed out. You know her curiously shrill voice?
Yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty,
I could not get rid of her. She brought me up to royalties, and people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras and parrot noses. She spoke of me as her dearest friend. I had only met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me. I believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the nineteenth-century standard of immortality. Suddenly I found myself face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely stirred me. We were quite close, almost touching. Our eyes met again. It was reckless of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him. Perhaps it was not so reckless, after all. It was simply inevitable. We would have spoken to each other without any introduction. I am sure of that. Dorian told me so afterwards. He, too, felt that we were destined to know each other.
And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man? I know she goes in for giving a rapid _pr cis_ of all her guests. I remember her bringing me up to a truculent and red-faced old gentleman covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my ear, in a tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible to everybody in the room, the most astounding details. I simply fled. I like to find out people for myself. But Lady Brandon treats her guests exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods. She either explains them entirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wants to know.
Poor Lady Brandon! You are hard on her, Harry!
My dear fellow, she tried to found a _salon_, and only succeeded in opening a restaurant. How could I admire her? But tell me, what did she say about Mr. Dorian Gray?
Oh, something like,
Neither of us could help laughing, and we became friends at once.
Laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is far the best ending for one,
You don t understand what friendship is, Harry, or what enmity is, for that matter. You like every one; that is to say, you are indifferent to every one.
How horribly unjust of you! Yes; horribly unjust of you. I make a great difference between people. I choose my friends for their good looks, my acquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for their good intellects. A man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies. I have not got one who is a fool. They are all men of some intellectual power, and consequently they all appreciate me. Is that very vain of me? I think it is rather vain.
I should think it was, Harry. But according to your category I must be merely an acquaintance.
My dear old Basil, you are much more than an acquaintance.
And much less than a friend. A sort of brother, I suppose?
Oh, brothers! I don t care for brothers. My elder brother won t die, and my younger brothers seem never to do anything else.
Harry!
My dear fellow, I am not quite serious. But I can t help detesting my relations. I suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can stand other people having the same faults as ourselves. I quite sympathize with the rage of the English democracy against what they call the vices of the upper orders. The masses feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and immorality should be their own special property, and that if any one of us makes an ass of himself, he is poaching on their preserves. When poor Southwark got into the divorce court, their indignation was quite magnificent. And yet I don t suppose that ten per cent of the proletariat live correctly.
I don t agree with a single word that you have said, and, what is more, Harry, I feel sure you don t either.
How English you are Basil! That is the second time you have made that observation. If one puts forward an idea to a true Englishman always a rash thing to do he never dreams of considering whether the idea is right or wrong. The only thing he considers of any importance is whether one believes it oneself. Now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do with the sincerity of the man who expresses it. Indeed, the probabilities are that the more insincere the man is, the more purely intellectual will the idea be, as in that case it will not be coloured by either his wants, his desires, or his prejudices. However, I don t propose to discuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you. I like persons better than principles, and I like persons with no principles better than anything else in the world. Tell me more about Mr. Dorian Gray. How often do you see him?
Every day. I couldn t be happy if I didn t see him every day. He is absolutely necessary to me.
How extraordinary! I thought you would never care for anything but your art.
He is all my art to me now, I sometimes think, Harry, that there are only two eras of any importance in the world s history. The first is the appearance of a new medium for art, and the second is the appearance of a new personality for art also. What the invention of oil-painting was to the Venetians, the face of Antinous was to late Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian Gray will some day be to me. It is not merely that I paint from him, draw from him, sketch from him. Of course, I have done all that. But he is much more to me than a model or a sitter. I won t tell you that I am dissatisfied with what I have done of him, or that his beauty is such that art cannot express it. There is nothing that art cannot express, and I know that the work I have done, since I met Dorian Gray, is good work, is the best work of my life. But in some curious way I wonder will you understand me? his personality has suggested to me an entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of style. I see things differently, I think of them differently. I can now recreate life in a way that was hidden from me before. who is it who says that? I forget; but it is what Dorian Gray has been to me. The merely visible presence of this lad for he seems to me little more than a lad, though he is really over twenty his merely visible presence ah! I wonder can you realize all that that means? Unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh school, a school that is to have in it all the passion of the romantic spirit, all the perfection of the spirit that is Greek. The harmony of soul and body how much that is! We in our madness have separated the two, and have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that is void. Harry! if you only knew what Dorian Gray is to me! You remember that landscape of mine, for which Agnew offered me such a huge price but which I would not part with? It is one of the best things I have ever done. And why is it so? Because, while I was painting it, Dorian Gray sat beside me. Some subtle influence passed from him to me, and for the first time in my life I saw in the plain woodland the wonder I had always looked for and always missed.
Basil, this is extraordinary! I must see Dorian Gray.
Harry, Dorian Gray is to me simply a motive in art. You might see nothing in him. I see everything in him. He is never more present in my work than when no image of him is there. He is a suggestion, as I have said, of a new manner. I find him in the curves of certain lines, in the loveliness and subtleties of certain colours. That is all.
Then why won t you exhibit his portrait?
Because, without intending it, I have put into it some expression of all this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, I have never cared to speak to him. He knows nothing about it. He shall never know anything about it. But the world might guess it, and I will not bare my soul to their shallow prying eyes. My heart shall never be put under their microscope. There is too much of myself in the thing, Harry too much of myself!
Poets are not so scrupulous as you are. They know how useful passion is for publication. Nowadays a broken heart will run to many editions.
I hate them for it, An artist should create beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them. We live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of autobiography. We have lost the abstract sense of beauty. Some day I will show the world what it is; and for that reason the world shall never see my portrait of Dorian Gray.
I think you are wrong, Basil, but I won t argue with you. It is only the intellectually lost who ever argue. Tell me, is Dorian Gray very fond of you?
He likes me, I know he likes me. Of course I flatter him dreadfully. I find a strange pleasure in saying things to him that I know I shall be sorry for having said. As a rule, he is charming to me, and we sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things. Now and then, however, he is horribly thoughtless, and seems to take a real delight in giving me pain. Then I feel, Harry, that I have given away my whole soul to some one who treats it as if it were a flower to put in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a summer s day.
Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger, Perhaps you will tire sooner than he will. It is a sad thing to think of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty. That accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate ourselves. In the wild struggle for existence, we want to have something that endures, and so we fill our minds with rubbish and facts, in the silly hope of keeping our place. The thoroughly well-informed man that is the modern ideal. And the mind of the thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing. It is like a _bric- -brac_ shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced above its proper value. I think you will tire first, all the same. Some day you will look at your friend, and he will seem to you to be a little out of drawing, or you won t like his tone of colour, or something. You will bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and seriously think that he has behaved very badly to you. The next time he calls, you will be perfectly cold and indifferent. It will be a great pity, for it will alter you. What you have told me is quite a romance, a romance of art one might call it, and the worst of having a romance of any kind is that it leaves one so unromantic.
Harry, don t talk like that. As long as I live, the personality of Dorian Gray will dominate me. You can t feel what I feel. You change too often.
Ah, my dear Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it. Those who are faithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless who know love s tragedies.
My dear fellow, I have just remembered.
Remembered what, Harry?
Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray.
Where was it?
Don t look so angry, Basil. It was at my aunt, Lady Agatha s. She told me she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to help her in the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray. I am bound to state that she never told me he was good-looking. Women have no appreciation of good looks; at least, good women have not. She said that he was very earnest and had a beautiful nature. I at once pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, horribly freckled, and tramping about on huge feet. I wish I had known it was your friend.
I am very glad you didn t, Harry.
Why?
I don t want you to meet him.
You don t want me to meet him?
No.
Mr. Dorian Gray is in the studio, sir,
You must introduce me now,
Ask Mr. Gray to wait, Parker: I shall be in in a few moments.
Dorian Gray is my dearest friend, He has a simple and a beautiful nature. Your aunt was quite right in what she said of him. Don t spoil him. Don t try to influence him. Your influence would be bad. The world is wide, and has many marvellous people in it. Don t take away from me the one person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses: my life as an artist depends on him. Mind, Harry, I trust you.
What nonsense you talk!
You must lend me these, Basil, I want to learn them. They are perfectly charming.
That entirely depends on how you sit to-day, Dorian.
Oh, I am tired of sitting, and I don t want a life-sized portrait of myself,
I beg your pardon, Basil, but I didn t know you had any one with you.
This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of mine. I have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now you have spoiled everything.
You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr. Gray, My aunt has often spoken to me about you. You are one of her favourites, and, I am afraid, one of her victims also.
I am in Lady Agatha s black books at present, I promised to go to a club in Whitechapel with her last Tuesday, and I really forgot all about it. We were to have played a duet together three duets, I believe. I don t know what she will say to me. I am far too frightened to call.
Oh, I will make your peace with my aunt. She is quite devoted to you. And I don t think it really matters about your not being there. The audience probably thought it was a duet. When Aunt Agatha sits down to the piano, she makes quite enough noise for two people.
That is very horrid to her, and not very nice to me,
You are too charming to go in for philanthropy, Mr. Gray far too charming.
Harry, I want to finish this picture to-day. Would you think it awfully rude of me if I asked you to go away?
Am I to go, Mr. Gray?
Oh, please don t, Lord Henry. I see that Basil is in one of his sulky moods, and I can t bear him when he sulks. Besides, I want you to tell me why I should not go in for philanthropy.
I don t know that I shall tell you that, Mr. Gray. It is so tedious a subject that one would have to talk seriously about it. But I certainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop. You don t really mind, Basil, do you? You have often told me that you liked your sitters to have some one to chat to.
If Dorian wishes it, of course you must stay. Dorian s whims are laws to everybody, except himself.
You are very pressing, Basil, but I am afraid I must go. I have promised to meet a man at the Orleans. Good-bye, Mr. Gray. Come and see me some afternoon in Curzon Street. I am nearly always at home at five o clock. Write to me when you are coming. I should be sorry to miss you.
Basil, if Lord Henry Wotton goes, I shall go, too. You never open your lips while you are painting, and it is horribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant. Ask him to stay. I insist upon it.
Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me, It is quite true, I never talk when I am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious for my unfortunate sitters. I beg you to stay.
But what about my man at the Orleans?
I don t think there will be any difficulty about that. Sit down again, Harry. And now, Dorian, get up on the platform, and don t move about too much, or pay any attention to what Lord Henry says. He has a very bad influence over all his friends, with the single exception of myself.
Have you really a very bad influence, Lord Henry? As bad as Basil says?
There is no such thing as a good influence, Mr. Gray. All influence is immoral immoral from the scientific point of view.
Why?
Because to influence a person is to give him one s own soul. He does not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions. His virtues are not real to him. His sins, if there are such things as sins, are borrowed. He becomes an echo of some one else s music, an actor of a part that has not been written for him. The aim of life is self-development. To realize one s nature perfectly that is what each of us is here for. People are afraid of themselves, nowadays. They have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes to one s self. Of course, they are charitable. They feed the hungry and clothe the beggar. But their own souls starve, and are naked. Courage has gone out of our race. Perhaps we never really had it. The terror of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of God, which is the secret of religion these are the two things that govern us. And yet
Just turn your head a little more to the right, Dorian, like a good boy,
And yet, I believe that if one man were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream I believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we would forget all the maladies of medi valism, and return to the Hellenic ideal to something finer, richer than the Hellenic ideal, it may be. But the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself. The mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denial that mars our lives. We are punished for our refusals. Every impulse that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us. The body sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of purification. Nothing remains then but the recollection of a pleasure, or the luxury of a regret. The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it. Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful. It has been said that the great events of the world take place in the brain. It is in the brain, and the brain only, that the great sins of the world take place also. You, Mr. Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid, thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame
Stop! stop! you bewilder me. I don t know what to say. There is some answer to you, but I cannot find it. Don t speak. Let me think. Or, rather, let me try not to think.
Basil, I am tired of standing, I must go out and sit in the garden. The air is stifling here.
My dear fellow, I am so sorry. When I am painting, I can t think of anything else. But you never sat better. You were perfectly still. And I have caught the effect I wanted the half-parted lips and the bright look in the eyes. I don t know what Harry has been saying to you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful expression. I suppose he has been paying you compliments. You mustn t believe a word that he says.
He has certainly not been paying me compliments. Perhaps that is the reason that I don t believe anything he has told me.
You know you believe it all, I will go out to the garden with you. It is horribly hot in the studio. Basil, let us have something iced to drink, something with strawberries in it.
Certainly, Harry. Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I will tell him what you want. I have got to work up this background, so I will join you later on. Don t keep Dorian too long. I have never been in better form for painting than I am to-day. This is going to be my masterpiece. It is my masterpiece as it stands.
You are quite right to do that, Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the senses but the soul.
Yes, that is one of the great secrets of life to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of the soul. You are a wonderful creation. You know more than you think you know, just as you know less than you want to know.
Let us go and sit in the shade, Parker has brought out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be quite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again. You really must not allow yourself to become sunburnt. It would be unbecoming.
What can it matter?
It should matter everything to you, Mr. Gray.
Why?
Because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the one thing worth having.
I don t feel that, Lord Henry.
No, you don t feel it now. Some day, when you are old and wrinkled and ugly, when thought has seared your forehead with its lines, and passion branded your lips with its hideous fires, you will feel it, you will feel it terribly. Now, wherever you go, you charm the world. Will it always be so? ... You have a wonderfully beautiful face, Mr. Gray. Don t frown. You have. And beauty is a form of genius is higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation. It is of the great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or the reflection in dark waters of that silver shell we call the moon. It cannot be questioned. It has its divine right of sovereignty. It makes princes of those who have it. You smile? Ah! when you have lost it you won t smile.... People say sometimes that beauty is only superficial. That may be so, but at least it is not so superficial as thought is. To me, beauty is the wonder of wonders. It is only shallow people who do not judge by appearances. The true mystery of the world is the visible, not the invisible.... Yes, Mr. Gray, the gods have been good to you. But what the gods give they quickly take away. You have only a few years in which to live really, perfectly, and fully. When your youth goes, your beauty will go with it, and then you will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs left for you, or have to content yourself with those mean triumphs that the memory of your past will make more bitter than defeats. Every month as it wanes brings you nearer to something dreadful. Time is jealous of you, and wars against your lilies and your roses. You will become sallow, and hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed. You will suffer horribly.... Ah! realize your youth while you have it. Don t squander the gold of your days, listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure, or giving away your life to the ignorant, the common, and the vulgar. These are the sickly aims, the false ideals, of our age. Live! Live the wonderful life that is in you! Let nothing be lost upon you. Be always searching for new sensations. Be afraid of nothing.... A new Hedonism that is what our century wants. You might be its visible symbol. With your personality there is nothing you could not do. The world belongs to you for a season.... The moment I met you I saw that you were quite unconscious of what you really are, of what you really might be. There was so much in you that charmed me that I felt I must tell you something about yourself. I thought how tragic it would be if you were wasted. For there is such a little time that your youth will last such a little time. The common hill-flowers wither, but they blossom again. The laburnum will be as yellow next June as it is now. In a month there will be purple stars on the clematis, and year after year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars. But we never get back our youth. The pulse of joy that beats in us at twenty becomes sluggish. Our limbs fail, our senses rot. We degenerate into hideous puppets, haunted by the memory of the passions of which we were too much afraid, and the exquisite temptations that we had not the courage to yield to. Youth! Youth! There is absolutely nothing in the world but youth!
I am waiting, Do come in. The light is quite perfect, and you can bring your drinks.
You are glad you have met me, Mr. Gray,
Yes, I am glad now. I wonder shall I always be glad?
Always! That is a dreadful word. It makes me shudder when I hear it. Women are so fond of using it. They spoil every romance by trying to make it last for ever. It is a meaningless word, too. The only difference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the caprice lasts a little longer.
In that case, let our friendship be a caprice,
It is quite finished,
My dear fellow, I congratulate you most warmly, It is the finest portrait of modern times. Mr. Gray, come over and look at yourself.
Is it really finished?
Quite finished, And you have sat splendidly to-day. I am awfully obliged to you.
That is entirely due to me, Isn t it, Mr. Gray?
Don t you like it?
Of course he likes it, Who wouldn t like it? It is one of the greatest things in modern art. I will give you anything you like to ask for it. I must have it.
It is not my property, Harry.
Whose property is it?
Dorian s, of course,
He is a very lucky fellow.
How sad it is! How sad it is! I shall grow old, and horrible, and dreadful. But this picture will remain always young. It will never be older than this particular day of June.... If it were only the other way! If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was to grow old! For that for that I would give everything! Yes, there is nothing in the whole world I would not give! I would give my soul for that!
You would hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil, It would be rather hard lines on your work.
I should object very strongly, Harry,
I believe you would, Basil. You like your art better than your friends. I am no more to you than a green bronze figure. Hardly as much, I dare say.
Yes, I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your silver Faun. You will like them always. How long will you like me? Till I have my first wrinkle, I suppose. I know, now, that when one loses one s good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything. Your picture has taught me that. Lord Henry Wotton is perfectly right. Youth is the only thing worth having. When I find that I am growing old, I shall kill myself.
Dorian! Dorian! don t talk like that. I have never had such a friend as you, and I shall never have such another. You are not jealous of material things, are you? you who are finer than any of them!
I am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die. I am jealous of the portrait you have painted of me. Why should it keep what I must lose? Every moment that passes takes something from me and gives something to it. Oh, if it were only the other way! If the picture could change, and I could be always what I am now! Why did you paint it? It will mock me some day mock me horribly!
This is your doing, Harry,
It is the real Dorian Gray that is all.
It is not.
If it is not, what have I to do with it?
You should have gone away when I asked you,
I stayed when you asked me,
Harry, I can t quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between you both you have made me hate the finest piece of work I have ever done, and I will destroy it. What is it but canvas and colour? I will not let it come across our three lives and mar them.
Don t, Basil, don t! It would be murder!
I am glad you appreciate my work at last, Dorian, I never thought you would.
Appreciate it? I am in love with it, Basil. It is part of myself. I feel that.
Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and sent home. Then you can do what you like with yourself.
You will have tea, of course, Dorian? And so will you, Harry? Or do you object to such simple pleasures?
I adore simple pleasures, They are the last refuge of the complex. But I don t like scenes, except on the stage. What absurd fellows you are, both of you! I wonder who it was defined man as a rational animal. It was the most premature definition ever given. Man is many things, but he is not rational. I am glad he is not, after all though I wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture. You had much better let me have it, Basil. This silly boy doesn t really want it, and I really do.
If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never forgive you! and I don t allow people to call me a silly boy.
You know the picture is yours, Dorian. I gave it to you before it existed.
And you know you have been a little silly, Mr. Gray, and that you don t really object to being reminded that you are extremely young.
I should have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry.
Ah! this morning! You have lived since then.
Let us go to the theatre to-night, There is sure to be something on, somewhere. I have promised to dine at White s, but it is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I am ill, or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a subsequent engagement. I think that would be a rather nice excuse: it would have all the surprise of candour.
It is such a bore putting on one s dress-clothes, And, when one has them on, they are so horrid.
Yes, the costume of the nineteenth century is detestable. It is so sombre, so depressing. Sin is the only real colour-element left in modern life.
You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry.
Before which Dorian? The one who is pouring out tea for us, or the one in the picture?
Before either.
I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord Henry,
Then you shall come; and you will come, too, Basil, won t you?
I can t, really. I would sooner not. I have a lot of work to do.
Well, then, you and I will go alone, Mr. Gray.
I should like that awfully.
I shall stay with the real Dorian,
Is it the real Dorian? Am I really like that?
Yes; you are just like that.
How wonderful, Basil!
At least you are like it in appearance. But it will never alter, That is something.
What a fuss people make about fidelity! Why, even in love it is purely a question for physiology. It has nothing to do with our own will. Young men want to be faithful, and are not; old men want to be faithless, and cannot: that is all one can say.
Don t go to the theatre to-night, Dorian, Stop and dine with me.
I can t, Basil.
Why?
Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him.
He won t like you the better for keeping your promises. He always breaks his own. I beg you not to go.
I entreat you.
I must go, Basil,
Very well, It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had better lose no time. Good-bye, Harry. Good-bye, Dorian. Come and see me soon. Come to-morrow.
Certainly.
You won t forget?
No, of course not,
And ... Harry!
Yes, Basil?
Remember what I asked you, when we were in the garden this morning.
I have forgotten it.
I trust you.
I wish I could trust myself, Come, Mr. Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your own place. Good-bye, Basil. It has been a most interesting afternoon.
Well, Harry, what brings you out so early? I thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible till five.
Pure family affection, I assure you, Uncle George. I want to get something out of you.
Money, I suppose, Well, sit down and tell me all about it. Young people, nowadays, imagine that money is everything.
Yes, and when they grow older they know it. But I don t want money. It is only people who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and I never pay mine. Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives charmingly upon it. Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor s tradesmen, and consequently they never bother me. What I want is information: not useful information, of course; useless information.
Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue Book, Harry, although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense. When I was in the Diplomatic, things were much better. But I hear they let them in now by examination. What can you expect? Examinations, sir, are pure humbug from beginning to end. If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite enough, and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him.
Mr. Dorian Gray does not belong to Blue Books, Uncle George,
Mr. Dorian Gray? Who is he?
That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George. Or rather, I know who he is. He is the last Lord Kelso s grandson. His mother was a Devereux, Lady Margaret Devereux. I want you to tell me about his mother. What was she like? Whom did she marry? You have known nearly everybody in your time, so you might have known her. I am very much interested in Mr. Gray at present. I have only just met him.
Kelso s grandson! Kelso s grandson! ... Of course.... I knew his mother intimately. I believe I was at her christening. She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a penniless young fellow a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or something of that kind. Certainly. I remember the whole thing as if it happened yesterday. The poor chap was killed in a duel at Spa a few months after the marriage. There was an ugly story about it. They said Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute, to insult his son-in-law in public paid him, sir, to do it, paid him and that the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon. The thing was hushed up, but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some time afterwards. He brought his daughter back with him, I was told, and she never spoke to him again. Oh, yes; it was a bad business. The girl died, too, died within a year. So she left a son, did she? I had forgotten that. What sort of boy is he? If he is like his mother, he must be a good-looking chap.
He is very good-looking,
I hope he will fall into proper hands, He should have a pot of money waiting for him if Kelso did the right thing by him. His mother had money, too. All the Selby property came to her, through her grandfather. Her grandfather hated Kelso, thought him a mean dog. He was, too. Came to Madrid once when I was there. Egad, I was ashamed of him. The Queen used to ask me about the English noble who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares. They made quite a story of it. I didn t dare show my face at Court for a month. I hope he treated his grandson better than he did the jarvies.
I don t know, I fancy that the boy will be well off. He is not of age yet. He has Selby, I know. He told me so. And ... his mother was very beautiful?
Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw, Harry. What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never could understand. She could have married anybody she chose. Carlington was mad after her. She was romantic, though. All the women of that family were. The men were a poor lot, but, egad! the women were wonderful. Carlington went on his knees to her. Told me so himself. She laughed at him, and there wasn t a girl in London at the time who wasn t after him. And by the way, Harry, talking about silly marriages, what is this humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an American? Ain t English girls good enough for him?
It is rather fashionable to marry Americans just now, Uncle George.
I ll back English women against the world, Harry,
The betting is on the Americans.
They don t last, I am told,
A long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a steeplechase. They take things flying. I don t think Dartmoor has a chance.
Who are her people? Has she got any?
American girls are as clever at concealing their parents, as English women are at concealing their past,
They are pork-packers, I suppose?
I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor s sake. I am told that pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in America, after politics.
Is she pretty?
She behaves as if she was beautiful. Most American women do. It is the secret of their charm.
Why can t these American women stay in their own country? They are always telling us that it is the paradise for women.
It is. That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so excessively anxious to get out of it, Good-bye, Uncle George. I shall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer. Thanks for giving me the information I wanted. I always like to know everything about my new friends, and nothing about my old ones.
Where are you lunching, Harry?
At Aunt Agatha s. I have asked myself and Mr. Gray. He is her latest _prot g _.
Humph! tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more with her charity appeals. I am sick of them. Why, the good woman thinks that I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads.
All right, Uncle George, I ll tell her, but it won t have any effect. Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity. It is their distinguishing characteristic.
Late as usual, Harry,
We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry, Do you think he will really marry this fascinating young person?
I believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, Duchess.
How dreadful! Really, some one should interfere.
I am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an American dry-goods store,
My uncle has already suggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas.
Dry-goods! What are American dry-goods?
American novels,
Don t mind him, my dear, He never means anything that he says.
When America was discovered,
I wish to goodness it never had been discovered at all! Really, our girls have no chance nowadays. It is most unfair.
Perhaps, after all, America never has been discovered, I myself would say that it had merely been detected.
Oh! but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants, I must confess that most of them are extremely pretty. And they dress well, too. They get all their dresses in Paris. I wish I could afford to do the same.
They say that when good Americans die they go to Paris,
Really! And where do bad Americans go to when they die?
They go to America,
I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced against that great country, I have travelled all over it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters, are extremely civil. I assure you that it is an education to visit it.
But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated? I don t feel up to the journey.
Mr. Erskine of Treadley has the world on his shelves. We practical men like to see things, not to read about them. The Americans are an extremely interesting people. They are absolutely reasonable. I think that is their distinguishing characteristic. Yes, Mr. Erskine, an absolutely reasonable people. I assure you there is no nonsense about the Americans.
How dreadful! I can stand brute force, but brute reason is quite unbearable. There is something unfair about its use. It is hitting below the intellect.
I do not understand you,
I do, Lord Henry,
Paradoxes are all very well in their way....
Was that a paradox? I did not think so. Perhaps it was. Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth. To test reality we must see it on the tight rope. When the verities become acrobats, we can judge them.
Dear me! how you men argue! I am sure I never can make out what you are talking about. Oh! Harry, I am quite vexed with you. Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. Dorian Gray to give up the East End? I assure you he would be quite invaluable. They would love his playing.
I want him to play to me,
But they are so unhappy in Whitechapel,
I can sympathize with everything except suffering, I cannot sympathize with that. It is too ugly, too horrible, too distressing. There is something terribly morbid in the modern sympathy with pain. One should sympathize with the colour, the beauty, the joy of life. The less said about life s sores, the better.
Still, the East End is a very important problem,
Quite so, It is the problem of slavery, and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves.
What change do you propose, then?
I don t desire to change anything in England except the weather, I am quite content with philosophic contemplation. But, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt through an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest that we should appeal to science to put us straight. The advantage of the emotions is that they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is not emotional.
But we have such grave responsibilities,
Terribly grave,
Humanity takes itself too seriously. It is the world s original sin. If the caveman had known how to laugh, history would have been different.
You are really very comforting, I have always felt rather guilty when I came to see your dear aunt, for I take no interest at all in the East End. For the future I shall be able to look her in the face without a blush.
A blush is very becoming, Duchess,
Only when one is young, When an old woman like myself blushes, it is a very bad sign. Ah! Lord Henry, I wish you would tell me how to become young again.
Can you remember any great error that you committed in your early days, Duchess?
A great many, I fear,
Then commit them over again, To get back one s youth, one has merely to repeat one s follies.
A delightful theory! I must put it into practice.
A dangerous theory!
Yes, that is one of the great secrets of life. Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are one s mistakes.
How annoying! I must go. I have to call for my husband at the club, to take him to some absurd meeting at Willis s Rooms, where he is going to be in the chair. If I am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn t have a scene in this bonnet. It is far too fragile. A harsh word would ruin it. No, I must go, dear Agatha. Good-bye, Lord Henry, you are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing. I am sure I don t know what to say about your views. You must come and dine with us some night. Tuesday? Are you disengaged Tuesday?
For you I would throw over anybody, Duchess,
Ah! that is very nice, and very wrong of you, so mind you come
You talk books away, why don t you write one?
I am too fond of reading books to care to write them, Mr. Erskine. I should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely as a Persian carpet and as unreal. But there is no literary public in England for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias. Of all people in the world the English have the least sense of the beauty of literature.
I fear you are right, I myself used to have literary ambitions, but I gave them up long ago. And now, my dear young friend, if you will allow me to call you so, may I ask if you really meant all that you said to us at lunch?
I quite forget what I said, Was it all very bad?
Very bad indeed. In fact I consider you extremely dangerous, and if anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as being primarily responsible. But I should like to talk to you about life. The generation into which I was born was tedious. Some day, when you are tired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me your philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate enough to possess.
I shall be charmed. A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege. It has a perfect host, and a perfect library.
You will complete it, And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt. I am due at the Athenaeum. It is the hour when we sleep there.
All of you, Mr. Erskine?
Forty of us, in forty arm-chairs. We are practising for an English Academy of Letters.
I am going to the park,
Let me come with you,
But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him,
I would sooner come with you; yes, I feel I must come with you. Do let me. And you will promise to talk to me all the time? No one talks so wonderfully as you do.
Ah! I have talked quite enough for to-day, All I want now is to look at life. You may come and look at it with me, if you care to.
